It's time to dive into EHR code sets.
In health care, the different diagnosis code sets are extremely important,
and can sometimes be tricky to deal with.
But don't worry, when you're done with this section,
you'll be able to crack the code like a pro.
Now that we know a bit more about some of the key terms for this lesson, let's dig in.
First up, we'll go over diagnosis codes.
However, before we go into detail,
let's get a better sense for what a diagnosis code is and how important it is.
Let's imagine that you see a doctor,
and you have some symptoms such as coughing and stomach ache,
and then your doctor magically comes up with a diagnosis.
As we will learn later,
this diagnosis is a key piece of
information that connects so much of the encounter experience.
The global classification system that is most well known is the ICD-10 codes set,
which refers to the 10th revision of the standard created by the WHO.
However, in the US, ICD-10 has been modified for usage,
and there is a version called ICD-10-CM or clinical modification,
which is used widely for all diseases and conditions.
It is maintained by the US CDC and is used not only in health care claims,
but also by organizations that track disease epidemics.
From October 2014, there was a shift from ICD-9 to ICD-10 codes in the US.
The US has been using ICD-9 since 1979,
and this was a major change.
However, this lag a bit behind the rest of the world who had adopted ICD-10 much earlier.
The reason for the changes from ICD-9 to ICD-10 is that
the code set was not robust enough to meet future health care needs.
You can see that with this change,
there was a dramatic increase in the number of codes.
In terms of structural changes,
the biggest difference is that the ICD-10 codes can be longer and up to seven characters,
and which characters can be a letter or a number.
We'll go into more details soon.
In terms of structural changes,
the biggest difference is that the ICD-10 codes can be longer and up to seven characters,
and which characters can be a letter or a number.
It's important to note that codes can vary in length,
and medical coders try to represent things with
as much granularity in detail as they can.
But often the codes are shorter than seven characters.
So the anatomy of ICD-10-CM code is broken up into three parts.
The first, is the category of the diagnosis,
and it's the first three characters,
and could be an S code like the injury category.
There are 21 different categories,
and these range from the disease of the respiratory system,
to injury, poisoning, and certain other consequences of external causes.
The second is the etiology,
and atomic site, and manifestation part,
which can be up to three more characters,
and it's essentially the cause for a condition
or disease or the location of the condition.
Finally, the third part is the extension,
which is the last character and can be tricky because
it can often be null or has an X placeholder.
It's often used with injury related codes referring to episode of care.